# COM3610-Dissertation-Project
MindPath: Leveraging An iOS App and Web Platforms to Study the Interaction Between Mental Health and Lifestyle Factors

Motivation

Positive mental health is crucial in today’s world, as it profoundly impacts various aspects of our lives. Mental health impacts our thoughts, actions, decisions and day-to-day inter- actions. Over the years, mental health has traditionally focused on biological factors and chemical imbalances. Neither of these actually explored the possibility of a person’s lifestyle factors affecting their mental health. In recent years, there has been an active and grow- ing interest in mental well-being, which acknowledges the possibility that mental health is strongly correlated to a person’s lifestyle choices. Several studies have demonstrated the possibility of lifestyle factors affecting mental health. A meta-review of “lifestyle psychia- try”: the role of exercise, smoking, diet and sleep in the prevention and treatment of mental disorders proposed that ‘There is increasing academic and clinical interest in how “lifestyle factors” traditionally associated with physical health may also relate to mental health and psychological well-being’ [1]. Over the years, advancements in technology have undoubtedly enhanced our ability to diagnose, treat and evaluate various conditions. As of 2023, there are estimated to be between 10,000 to 20,000 mental well-being apps available [2]. However, most of these applications focus on helping users improve their emotional well-being and become more mindful. Despite these advancements and the increasing recognition of the role of lifestyle factors in mental health, there still remains a gap in understanding the magnitude of this interaction.

The main objective of this project was to build a system called MindPath. This involves a) Designing and developing an iOS application using Apple’s Research Kit - an open source framework that allows researchers and developers to create applications for medical research [3] and b) Designing and developing a website that visualises the data collected by the iOS application. The iOS app and website work together to form MindPath. The primary purpose of the application is to collect real-world data on participants’ daily lifestyle choices such as work, diet, sleep cycle, profession etc. As the data collected will be used for research, the first priority would be to anonymise and protect participant data. The data can be used by researchers to formulate a possible answer to the question of “How much does lifestyle choices affect one’s mental health”.The website will visually present the data using multifaceted data visualisations. This would allow researchers to gain a deeper understanding of the factors affecting mental health beyond theoretical constructs. It is important to note that this application and the website are not intended to be used as diagnostic tools. The sole purpose of this application and website is to try and provide a valuable perspective to foster the increasing academic and medical interest in the topic
